Cindy Cook, Matt Denny, Mitch Goist, Timmy Huynh
PLSC 597E / SoDA 502
September 16, 2015


Paper Description and Proposal


1. Overview of the Research Domain (3 grafs) (Matt & Timmy)


Hierarchy is an important feature of many organizations, such as firms, social clubs, and military units. Formally, we can define a hierarchy as a system where people or groups are ranked according to status or authority. Yet it is difficult to operationalize this definition for measurement and comparison. There has been a great deal of research on power and status in groups and organizations, but most of this research relies on measurements defined over domain specific rankings, such as job titles. At the same time, networks scholars have defined a number of broadly applicable hierarchy metrics based on network structure, but these metrics are not necessarily grounded in meaningful sociological concepts of status and authority. Contrastingly, social theorists like Michael Mann have noted the messiness of society and that a network-oriented perspective of the “sociospatial and organizational model [of a network]” can explicate the “sources of social power,” but they have generally not delved into the methodologies through which to fully explore such power dynamics. In this paper, we seek to bring together these two areas of research, and to develop a framework for measuring hierarchy in social networks that is both generally applicable and exhibits a high degree of construct validity.


Having developed a framework for measuring hierarchy in networks, we will then test its internal and external validity. To test the internal validity of such a measure, we will conduct a simulation study. To test the external validity of our measure we will compare measurements across networks that we can theoretically rank by their degree of hierarchy. We will  then apply our framework to better understand the implications of hierarchical network structure for organizational performance in a sample of 17 county government organizations. 


2. Problem Statement (1-2 grafs) (Matt)


How do we define and measure hierarchy in (directed) social networks? We need to relate sociological conceptions of hierarchy and power to network measures. In developing this framework we intend to compare analytical and statistical approaches to measurement on both synthetic and real world datasets. In particular there are several key questions we must address.
1. Is an analytical or statistical measure of network hierarchy more appropriate for our  goals?  
2. Can we capture all or even most salient dimensions of hierarchy as defined in the sociological literature in a single measure?
3. Can our measure be extended to undirected networks?


3. Empirical Research Design Overview (2 grafs) (Everyone)


We need to validate our approach on both synthetic and real world data. We should probably stick to directed social networks for now as that is the easier case, and it would be difficult to conceptualize undirected graphs with a distinct hierarchy as opposed to being simply multi-community. 


4. Data collection feasibility (1 graf) (Mitch)




Dolphin network data: https://networkdata.ics.uci.edu/data.php?id=6 
American college football network data: https://networkdata.ics.uci.edu/data.php?id=5 


Network data repository (via UC-Irvine): https://networkdata.ics.uci.edu/index.php
Another network data repository (via Mark Newman): http://www-personal.umich.edu/~mejn/netdata/ 


Matt has 120,000k emails sent and received by 362 county department managers across 17 counties, with covariate data. 


Matt also has network data from the united states congress (cosponsorship, influence, coauthorship)


Matt also has the Enron email corpus. 




5. Analytics Detail (2 grafs) (Cindy)


The analytical portion of the problem will be conducted in R, which is known by all members of the group. We will be using both statistical and mathematical methods of quantifying and/or measuring hierarchy. We will focus on methods that have already been developed, published, and implemented in R, or are can easily be implemented by one of the group members. If time permits, we may try to develop or suggest directions for future development of our own statistical models and/or mathematical measurements. Each member of the group will be responsible for at least one method. (I’m not sure if this is exactly what we want to do?? I can take the more statistical models such as ERGMs and some Bayesian methods, while everyone else chooses a more mathematical measure or something that is of interest to them). 
 
The statistical methods we will be looking into include hierarchical exponential graph models in the R package hergm. This package also includes hierarchical stochastic block models. Unlike fitting network data with exponential random graph models (ERGMs), hierarchical ERGMs focus on inducing local dependencies. Next, we will focus on latent space models, which can be fit in R using the latentnet package in the statnet suite of packages. For both the latent space and ERGM models, Bayesian inferential analysis can be conducted using the Bergm, VBLPCM, and lvm4net packages in R. We note that whenever fitting network data there is always the chance for computational timing and accuracy issues to come up. We have chosen a large [a]set of datasets for the purposes of capturing several types of hierarchies, but also so that we may have a few that are easily fit in R. Lastly, we will focus on mathematical measures of hierarchy. These measures primarily stem from graph theory, and can be easily programed by ourselves in R. The measurements include the Global Reach Centrality (GRC), Triangle Transitivity, Kendall’s K, and Landau’s lambda. (Please feel free to add to this list if I am missing something major that we should look at!)   


6. Significance (1 graf) (Cindy)


All of our fields including political science, sociology, and statistics approach the concept of hierarchy from different angles. Yet the main goal of any researcher is the same:  to accurately theoretically understand and quantify real world phenomena. Without statistical models/mathematical measurements for hierarchy which are theoretically based, and vice versa; theory that can be statistical/mathematically quantified and verified, the conceptual idea of hierarchy cannot be fully understood. We do not suggest that this project will achieve an overreaching theory and methods, but we strive to take the first step. At the very least, we will try to demonstrate the need for a united theory and corresponding methods. As an interdisciplinary team, we are in the unique position to accomplish our goals.




7.  Publication Plan (1 graf) (Timmy)


Because our project deals with networks, the most natural publication outlet is the interdisciplinary journal Social Networks, which would be a beneficial publication for all group members. As the project progresses, if we find the time to create a new method of measuring for hierarchy(-ies) in networks and compare this new interpretation to prior measures, we may instead aim for the interdisciplinary scientific journal Science since we would be pushing for new knowledge. Alternatively, if instead we find that it is more important/interesting for us to contextualize and theorize for the need of measuring hierarchy in networks, we may choose the discipline-specific journal American Sociological Review because most of our current ideas and understandings for the operationalization and definitional need of network hierarchy is situated in social theory.


[a]Maybe "diverse set of datasets" instead?